# How to Contribute to Avalanche

## Setup

To start developing on AvalancheGo, you'll need a few things installed.

- Golang version >= 1.19.6
- gcc
- g++

## Issues

### Security
- Do not open up a GitHub issue if it relates to a security vulnerability in AvalancheGo, and instead refer to our [security policy](../SECURITY.md).

### Did you fix whitespace, format code, or make a purely cosmetic patch?

- Changes from the community that are cosmetic in nature and do not add anything substantial to the stability, functionality, or testability of Rails will generally not be accepted.

### Other

- Ensure the bug was not already reported by searching on GitHub under [issues](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/issues).
- If you're unable to find an open issue addressing the problem, [open a new one](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/issues/new/choose). Be sure to include a *title and clear description* with as much relevant information as possible.

#### Features

- If an issue involves the discussion of the development of a new feature or the modification of an existing one, do not start development on a pull request until you receive positive feedback about the change from the maintainers.

## Pull Request Guidelines

- Open a new GitHub pull request with the patch.
- Ensure the PR description clearly describes the problem and solution. Include the relevant issue number if applicable.
- The PR should be opened against the `dev` branch, which contains all of the latest changes that are ready to be released.
- If your PR isn't ready to be reviewed just yet, you can open it as a draft to collect early feedback on your changes.
- Once the PR is ready for review, mark it as ready-for-review and request review from one of the maintainers.

### Autogenerated code

- Any changes to protobuf message types require that protobuf files are regenerated.
```sh
./scripts/protobuf_codegen.sh
```
- To add or remove an interface that needs a corresponding mock generated, add it to the mock file [here](../mocks.mockgen.txt). You can regenerate the mocks by running the following script.
```sh
./scripts/mock.gen.sh
```

### Testing

#### Local

- Build the avalanchego binary
```
./scripts/build.sh
```

- Run unit tests
```
./scripts/build_test.sh
```

- Run the linter
```
./scripts/lint.sh
```

### Continuous Integration (CI)

Generally, pull requests will not be approved or merged unless they pass CI.

## Other

### Do you have questions about the source code?

- Ask any question about AvalancheGo in the [Discord server](https://discord.com/invite/RwXY7P6).

### Do you want to contribute to the Avalanche documentation?

- Please check out the `avalanche-docs` repository [here](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanche-docs).
