# How to Contribute to Avalanche

## Setup

To start developing on AvalancheGo, you'll need a few things installed.

- Golang version >= 1.23.9
- gcc
- g++

On MacOS, a modern version of bash is required (e.g. via [homebrew](https://brew.sh/) with `brew install bash`). The version installed by default is not compatible with AvalancheGo's [shell scripts](scripts).

## Running tasks

This repo uses the [Task](https://taskfile.dev/) task runner to simplify usage and discoverability of development tasks. To list available tasks:

```bash
./scripts/run_task.sh
```

## Issues

### Security

- Do not open up a GitHub issue if it relates to a security vulnerability in AvalancheGo, and instead refer to our [security policy](./SECURITY.md).

### Did you fix whitespace, format code, or make a purely cosmetic patch?

- Changes from the community that are cosmetic in nature and do not add anything substantial to the stability, functionality, or testability of `avalanchego` will generally not be accepted.

### Making an Issue

- Check that the issue you're filing doesn't already exist by searching under [issues](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/issues).
- If you're unable to find an open issue addressing the problem, [open a new one](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/issues/new/choose). Be sure to include a *title and clear description* with as much relevant information as possible.

## Features

- If you want to start a discussion about the development of a new feature or the modification of an existing one, start a thread under GitHub [discussions](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/discussions/categories/ideas).
- Post a thread about your idea and why it should be added to AvalancheGo.
- Don't start working on a pull request until you've received positive feedback from the maintainers.

## Pull Request Guidelines

- Open a new GitHub pull request containing your changes.
- Ensure the PR description clearly describes the problem and solution. Include the relevant issue number if applicable.
- The PR should be opened against the `master` branch.
- If your PR isn't ready to be reviewed just yet, you can open it as a draft to collect early feedback on your changes.
- Once the PR is ready for review, mark it as ready-for-review and request review from one of the maintainers.

### Autogenerated code

- Any changes to protobuf message types require that protobuf files are regenerated.

```sh
./scripts/run_task.sh generate-protobuf
```

#### Autogenerated mocks

💁 The general direction is to **reduce** usage of mocks, so use the following with moderation.

Mocks are auto-generated using [mockgen](https://pkg.go.dev/go.uber.org/mock/mockgen) and `//go:generate` commands in the code.

- To **re-generate all mocks**, use the command below from the root of the project:

    ```sh
    ./scripts/run_task.sh generate-mocks
    ```

- To **add** an interface that needs a corresponding mock generated:
  - if the file `mocks_generate_test.go` exists in the package where the interface is located, either:
    - modify its `//go:generate go run go.uber.org/mock/mockgen` to generate a mock for your interface (preferred); or
    - add another `//go:generate go run go.uber.org/mock/mockgen` to generate a mock for your interface according to specific mock generation settings
  - if the file `mocks_generate_test.go` does not exist in the package where the interface is located, create it with content (adapt as needed):

    ```go
    // Copyright (C) 2019-2025, Ava Labs, Inc. All rights reserved.
    // See the file LICENSE for licensing terms.

    package mypackage

    //go:generate go run go.uber.org/mock/mockgen -package=${GOPACKAGE} -destination=mocks_test.go . YourInterface
    ```

    Notes:
    1. Ideally generate all mocks to `mocks_test.go` for the package you need to use the mocks for and do not export mocks to other packages. This reduces package dependencies, reduces production code pollution and forces to have locally defined narrow interfaces.
    1. Prefer using reflect mode to generate mocks than source mode, unless you need a mock for an unexported interface, which should be rare.
- To **remove** an interface from having a corresponding mock generated:
  1. Edit the `mocks_generate_test.go` file in the directory where the interface is defined
  1. If the `//go:generate` mockgen command line:
      - generates a mock file for multiple interfaces, remove your interface from the line
      - generates a mock file only for the interface, remove the entire line. If the file is empty, remove `mocks_generate_test.go` as well.

### Testing

#### Local

- Build the avalanchego binary

```sh
./scripts/run_task.sh build
```

- Run unit tests

```sh
./scripts/run_task.sh test-unit
```

- Run the linter

```sh
./scipts/run_task.sh lint
```

### Continuous Integration (CI)

- Pull requests will generally not be approved or merged unless they pass CI.

## Other

### Do you have questions about the source code?

- Ask any question about AvalancheGo under GitHub [discussions](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/discussions/categories/q-a).

### Do you want to contribute to the Avalanche documentation?

- Please check out the `avalanche-docs` repository [here](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanche-docs).
