README.md, before:

# Subnet EVM

[![Releases](https://img.shields.io/github/v/tag/ava-labs/subnet-evm.svg?sort=semver)](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/releases)
[![CI](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![CodeQL](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/actions/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/actions/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/ava-labs/subnet-evm)](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/master/LICENSE)

[Avalanche](https://docs.avax.network/avalanche-l1s) is a network composed of multiple blockchains.
Each blockchain is an instance of a Virtual Machine (VM), much like an object in an object-oriented language is an instance of a class.
That is, the VM defines the behavior of the blockchain.

Subnet EVM is the [Virtual Machine (VM)](https://docs.avax.network/learn/virtual-machines) that defines the Subnet Contract Chains. Subnet EVM is a simplified version of [Coreth VM (C-Chain)](https://github.com/ava-labs/coreth).

This chain implements the Ethereum Virtual Machine and supports Solidity smart contracts as well as most other Ethereum client functionality.

## Building

The Subnet EVM runs in a separate process from the main AvalancheGo process and communicates with it over a local gRPC connection.

### AvalancheGo Compatibility

```text
[v0.7.0] AvalancheGo@v1.12.0-v1.12.1 (Protocol Version: 38)
[v0.7.1] AvalancheGo@v1.12.2 (Protocol Version: 39)
[v0.7.2] AvalancheGo@v1.12.2/1.13.0-fuji (Protocol Version: 39)
[v0.7.3] AvalancheGo@v1.12.2/1.13.0 (Protocol Version: 39)
[v0.7.4] AvalancheGo@v1.13.1 (Protocol Version: 40)
[v0.7.5] AvalancheGo@v1.13.2 (Protocol Version: 41)
[v0.7.6] AvalancheGo@v1.13.3-rc.2 (Protocol Version: 42)
[v0.7.7] AvalancheGo@v1.13.3 (Protocol Version: 42)
[v0.7.8] AvalancheGo@v1.13.4 (Protocol Version: 43)
[v0.7.9] AvalancheGo@v1.13.5 (Protocol Version: 43)
[v0.8.0] AvalancheGo@v1.14.0 (Protocol Version: 44)
```

## API

The Subnet EVM supports the following API namespaces:

- `eth`
- `personal`
- `txpool`
- `debug`

Only the `eth` namespace is enabled by default.
Subnet EVM is a simplified version of [Coreth VM (C-Chain)](https://github.com/ava-labs/coreth).
Full documentation for the C-Chain's API can be found [here](https://build.avax.network/docs/api-reference/c-chain/api).

## Compatibility

The Subnet EVM is compatible with almost all Ethereum tooling, including [Remix](https://docs.avax.network/build/dapp/smart-contracts/remix-deploy), [Metamask](https://docs.avax.network/build/dapp/chain-settings), and [Foundry](https://docs.avax.network/build/dapp/smart-contracts/toolchains/foundry).

## Differences Between Subnet EVM and Coreth

- Added configurable fees and gas limits in genesis
- Merged Avalanche hardforks into the single "Subnet EVM" hardfork
- Removed Atomic Txs and Shared Memory
- Removed Multicoin Contract and State

## Block Format

To support these changes, there have been a number of changes to the SubnetEVM block format compared to what exists on the C-Chain and Ethereum. Here we list the changes to the block format as compared to Ethereum.

### Block Header

- `BaseFee`: Added by EIP-1559 to represent the base fee of the block (present in Ethereum as of EIP-1559)
- `BlockGasCost`: surcharge for producing a block faster than the target rate

## Create an EVM Subnet on a Local Network

### Clone Subnet-evm

First install Go 1.24.9 or later. Follow the instructions [here](https://go.dev/doc/install). You can verify by running `go version`.

Set `$GOPATH` environment variable properly for Go to look for Go Workspaces. Please read [this](https://go.dev/doc/code) for details. You can verify by running `echo $GOPATH`.

As a few software will be installed into `$GOPATH/bin`, please make sure that `$GOPATH/bin` is in your `$PATH`, otherwise, you may get error running the commands below.

Download the `subnet-evm` repository into your `$GOPATH`:

```sh
cd $GOPATH
mkdir -p src/github.com/ava-labs
cd src/github.com/ava-labs
git clone git@github.com:ava-labs/subnet-evm.git
cd subnet-evm
```

This will clone and checkout to `master` branch.

### Run Local Network

To run a local network, it is recommended to use the [avalanche-cli](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanche-cli#avalanche-cli) to set up an instance of Subnet-EVM on a local Avalanche Network.

There are two options when using the Avalanche-CLI:

1. Use an official Subnet-EVM release: <https://docs.avax.network/subnets/build-first-subnet>
2. Build and deploy a locally built (and optionally modified) version of Subnet-EVM: <https://docs.avax.network/subnets/create-custom-subnet>

## Releasing

You can refer to the [`docs/releasing/README.md`](docs/releasing/README.md) file for the release process.

Commit message:

Specify cancun compatibility in solc compiler (#1880)

README.md, after:

# Subnet EVM

[![Releases](https://img.shields.io/github/v/tag/ava-labs/subnet-evm.svg?sort=semver)](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/releases)
[![CI](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![CodeQL](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/actions/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/actions/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/ava-labs/subnet-evm)](https://github.com/ava-labs/subnet-evm/blob/master/LICENSE)

[Avalanche](https://docs.avax.network/avalanche-l1s) is a network composed of multiple blockchains.
Each blockchain is an instance of a Virtual Machine (VM), much like an object in an object-oriented language is an instance of a class.
That is, the VM defines the behavior of the blockchain.

Subnet EVM is the [Virtual Machine (VM)](https://docs.avax.network/learn/virtual-machines) that defines the Subnet Contract Chains. Subnet EVM is a simplified version of [Coreth VM (C-Chain)](https://github.com/ava-labs/coreth).

This chain implements the Ethereum Virtual Machine and supports Solidity smart contracts as well as most other Ethereum client functionality.

## Building

The Subnet EVM runs in a separate process from the main AvalancheGo process and communicates with it over a local gRPC connection.

### AvalancheGo Compatibility

```text
[v0.7.0] AvalancheGo@v1.12.0-v1.12.1 (Protocol Version: 38)
[v0.7.1] AvalancheGo@v1.12.2 (Protocol Version: 39)
[v0.7.2] AvalancheGo@v1.12.2/1.13.0-fuji (Protocol Version: 39)
[v0.7.3] AvalancheGo@v1.12.2/1.13.0 (Protocol Version: 39)
[v0.7.4] AvalancheGo@v1.13.1 (Protocol Version: 40)
[v0.7.5] AvalancheGo@v1.13.2 (Protocol Version: 41)
[v0.7.6] AvalancheGo@v1.13.3-rc.2 (Protocol Version: 42)
[v0.7.7] AvalancheGo@v1.13.3 (Protocol Version: 42)
[v0.7.8] AvalancheGo@v1.13.4 (Protocol Version: 43)
[v0.7.9] AvalancheGo@v1.13.5 (Protocol Version: 43)
[v0.8.0] AvalancheGo@v1.14.0 (Protocol Version: 44)
```

## API

The Subnet EVM supports the following API namespaces:

- `eth`
- `personal`
- `txpool`
- `debug`

Only the `eth` namespace is enabled by default.
Subnet EVM is a simplified version of [Coreth VM (C-Chain)](https://github.com/ava-labs/coreth).
Full documentation for the C-Chain's API can be found [here](https://build.avax.network/docs/api-reference/c-chain/api).

## Compatibility

The Subnet EVM is compatible with almost all Ethereum tooling, including [Remix](https://docs.avax.network/build/dapp/smart-contracts/remix-deploy), [Metamask](https://docs.avax.network/build/dapp/chain-settings), and [Foundry](https://docs.avax.network/build/dapp/smart-contracts/toolchains/foundry).

**Note:** Subnet-EVM and Avalanche C-Chain currently implement the Ethereum Cancun fork and do not yet support newer hardforks (such as Pectra). Since Solidity v0.8.30 switched its default target EVM version to Pectra, contracts compiled with default settings may emit bytecode using instructions/features that Avalanche does not support.
To avoid this mismatch, explicitly set the Solidity compiler’s `evmVersion` to `cancun` when deploying to Subnet-EVM or the C-Chain.

## Differences Between Subnet EVM and Coreth

- Added configurable fees and gas limits in genesis
- Merged Avalanche hardforks into the single "Subnet EVM" hardfork
- Removed Atomic Txs and Shared Memory
- Removed Multicoin Contract and State

## Block Format

To support these changes, there have been a number of changes to the SubnetEVM block format compared to what exists on the C-Chain and Ethereum. Here we list the changes to the block format as compared to Ethereum.

### Block Header

- `BaseFee`: Added by EIP-1559 to represent the base fee of the block (present in Ethereum as of EIP-1559)
- `BlockGasCost`: surcharge for producing a block faster than the target rate

## Create an EVM Subnet on a Local Network

### Clone Subnet-evm

First install Go 1.24.9 or later. Follow the instructions [here](https://go.dev/doc/install). You can verify by running `go version`.

Set `$GOPATH` environment variable properly for Go to look for Go Workspaces. Please read [this](https://go.dev/doc/code) for details. You can verify by running `echo $GOPATH`.

As a few software will be installed into `$GOPATH/bin`, please make sure that `$GOPATH/bin` is in your `$PATH`, otherwise, you may get error running the commands below.

Download the `subnet-evm` repository into your `$GOPATH`:

```sh
cd $GOPATH
mkdir -p src/github.com/ava-labs
cd src/github.com/ava-labs
git clone git@github.com:ava-labs/subnet-evm.git
cd subnet-evm
```

This will clone and checkout to `master` branch.

### Run Local Network

To run a local network, it is recommended to use the [avalanche-cli](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanche-cli#avalanche-cli) to set up an instance of Subnet-EVM on a local Avalanche Network.

There are two options when using the Avalanche-CLI:

1. Use an official Subnet-EVM release: <https://docs.avax.network/subnets/build-first-subnet>
2. Build and deploy a locally built (and optionally modified) version of Subnet-EVM: <https://docs.avax.network/subnets/create-custom-subnet>

## Releasing

You can refer to the [`docs/releasing/README.md`](docs/releasing/README.md) file for the release process.
